Revise description of attester<->verifier trust (#149)
ietf-rats-wg/architecture: draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md

## Attester

> The Attester proves it is trustworthy to the Verifier by using key material provisioned into it by the Endorser.

Reviewer: "provisioned into it by the Endorser" is not true in general.   For example, it's not true in the case where the Attester is an IoT device that generates its own key pair at the factory, and the public key is then extracted and used to generate a certificate issued by an Endorser (the manufacturer or whoever else), and the certificate itself isn't provisioned on the device but can be looked up on demand by the Verifier.  In this case, there is no "key material" provisioned into the Attester by any entity other than the Attester itself.

Line 723 and 754 are incorrect for the same reason.

Author: We probably should come up with better phrase -- "establish key material" or "set up key material" or "personalization"? It seems awkward to explain all the options each time it needs to be mentioned.

Even if the key material is generated on the device, you still have to do real work to 1) provide integrity when the public key is coming off the device and 2) make sure you are only taking keys off of real devices (no imposter, forgery or midnight runs). 

I have seen the term "provision" used to mean the whole process at a high level.

I know you keep bringing this up. I very much agree that what you suggest is the best way and should be allowed for and encouraged in the architecture doc, but I also know that are many situations where it can't be done. For example, it can't be done with symmetric keys. It can be done when you are putting keys into fuses on a chip that has no HW key generation feature. It can't be done when keys are supplied by someone other than the manufacturer.

So it seems we need some term or wording to describe this that covers all the scenarios.

Reviewer 2: A common problem.

Maybe: "Attesters prove their trustworthiness to Verifiers via their key material that is established in their Attesting Environments under the control and authority of a trusted Endorsers." (might have an effect on the following sentences)

> The proof is by the signing or authenticating of Attestation Evidence (see discussion on freshness elsewhere in this document).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof is by the signing or authenticating of Evidence (see {{freshness}}).
```

The Endorser only puts this key material into Attesters that it trusts.
This part of the Attester is often known as, or performed by, a root of trust.
The security strength or value of the overall Attestation depends greatly on the security strength of the implementation of the root of trust.

> See further discussion in Security Considerations.

Reviewer: This would need to be a markdown cross reference.

## Attester

> Attesters prove their trustworthiness to Verifiers via key material that is established in their Attesting Environments by an Attester manufacturer and/or an Endorser.
> The proof is by the signing or authenticating of Evidence. See {{freshness}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attesters prove their trustworthiness to Verifiers via Evidence signed using key material that is established in their Attesting Environments, and some way of ensuring freshness (see {{freshness}}).
```

The Attester manufacturer and/or Endorser only puts this key material into Attesters that it trusts.
This part of the Attester is often known as, or performed by, a root of trust.
The security strength or value of the overall Attestation depends greatly on the security strength of the implementation of the root of trust.

> There is also a non-remote attestation use case where the Attester and Verifier are directly connected such that cryptographic proof of trustworthiness is unnecessary (e.g., they are on the same chip).

Reviewer 2: I am not comfortable wit using the phrase "non-remote attestation". The reader has no reference or context here and I find it quite confusing.

## Attester

Attesters prove their trustworthiness to Verifiers via key material that is established in their Attesting Environments by an Attester manufacturer and/or an Endorser.
The proof is by the signing or authenticating of Evidence. See {{freshness}}.
The Attester manufacturer and/or Endorser only puts this key material into Attesters that it trusts.
This part of the Attester is often known as, or performed by, a root of trust.
The security strength or value of the overall Attestation depends greatly on the security strength of the implementation of the root of trust.

> See {{security-considerations}} for discussion on security strength.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

## Verifier

The Verifier trusts (or more specifically, the Verifier's security policy is written in a way that configures the Verifier to trust) an Endorser who supplies an Endorsement which contains information by which the Verifier can come to trust the Attester.
Typically, that information is a key used to verify the signature on Attestation Evidence which proves that the Attester has the private key that is only put into trustworthy devices by the Endorser.

> That is, the Verifier comes to trust the Attester transitively through the Endorser.

Reviewer: Hard to review since line breaks were removed.  Please revert line breaks.

Reviewer 4: Other than line breaks, I agree with the new content.

valid.  Thus, if the Attestation Result sends a validity lifetime
in terms of time(RX)-time(RG), then the Relying Party can check
`time(OP) - time(ER) < time(RX)-time(RG)`.

> # Appendix B: System Examples

Reviewer 4: Was there consensus that this belongs in the architecture draft?

(Rough first draft to see if there is interest)

> 

Reviewer: Keep examples in a separate PR

Author: Yes. Github mistake.

## System Example with OS Vendor as Main Driver

Three entities (companies / organizations) participate in this examples.

> The operating system vendor is at the center. It sets the architecture and the level of security achieved. It performs the following:

Reviewer 4: It isn't clear which attestation role the operating system vendor is assuming. As an endorser that provisions the attestation private key and the mfg CA that issues the attestation ID certificate, this often isn't an operating system vendor. Since this is an example, the vendor very well could be, but that isn't usually how it works.

* Generates large quantities of ECDSA key pairs to be used as per-device attestation keys

> * Signs the public keys using an attestation PKI and root that they control creating per-device certificates.

Reviewer 4: Need to disambiguate 'root' as it could refer to a root CA or a root of trust component.

> * Securely sends the private keys and certificates to the device OEM in batches to be used in manufacturing

Reviewer 4: It is difficult to follow who the subject of the sentence is. If it is the operating system vendor from line 1326 then it doesn't make sense for the OS vendor to know private keys for attesting environments. This draft shouldn't give the impression that it advocates doing that.

* Authors the device SW that is the Attester and ships it to the OEMs. This is a part of the OS.
* Publishes the root certificate and definition of the claims

The device OEM does the manufacturing. It performs the following:
* Physically makes the device to OS vendors security requirements
* Installs the OS on the device

> * Personalizes each device with a unique private key and certificate supplied by the OS vendor

Reviewer 4: I expected the OEM would be in charge of the key creation and certificate issuance since it is a use case where the OEM is 'driving'.

The application vendor that implements some application with a back-end cloud service. It performs the following:
* Author an app on the device that calls the attestation API to obtain Attestation Evidence
* Convey the Attestation Evidence to the back-end cloud service over the network
* Verify the Attestation Evidence and decided whether or not to allow application service

This maps as follows in the RATS architecture:

Endorser:

: The operating system vendor is the endorser

Endorsement:

> : The root certificate published by the endorser

Reviewer 4: Unclear if root refers to a root CA or root of trust / Attesting Environment.

Attester:

: The HW made by the device OEM and the SW made by the OS vendor

Attestation Evidence:

: A protocol message generated by the Attester on the request of the application that is then sent to the application vendor cloud service.

Verifier and Verifier Owner:

: are run by the application vendor cloud service

Relying Party and Relying Party Owner:

: are also the application vendor cloud service; since the Verify and Relying Part are the same the distinction between passport and background check doesn’t apply.

Attestation Result:

: non existent as the Verifier is the same as the Rely Party

## System Example Made Up of Chip Vendor and IoT Device Maker

Two entities (companies / organizations) participate in this example.

The chip vendor that makes the chip. They also make the SW that is the Attester. It does the following:

> * Manufacturers the chip

Reviewer 4: manufactures - typo?

* Authors the SW that runs on the chip that is the Attester
* Personalizes each chip with a unique 256-bit symmetric key and key ID
* Also stores the 256-bit symmetric key in a well-secured database

> * Operates a web-based HMAC verification service the inputs to which are the key ID and HMAC to verify and the output is a yes or no on the verification

Reviewer 4: Is the attestation evidence in the form of an HMAC? Is the Verifier supplying a query to the mfr'r web service in the form of an HMAC and key ID?

The IoT device maker buys chips from the vendor, makes the chip the core of an IoT device (perhaps sensors for a home security service). It does the following:
* Manufacturers and a device that an end user may purchase

> * Adds their own SW to the device over the top of the SW the chip vendor supplied

Reviewer 4: This deployment case seems to be 80% overlapping the previous one.

* Receives Attestation Results from 3rd party verification service.
* Decides whether to grant the service, perhaps varying the payment amount allowed based on details that are in the Attestation Result such the certifications the device has received

The 3rd Party Verification and Attestation Aggregation Service. It does the following:
* Receives Attestation Evidence from the Relying Party (This uses the Background Check Model)
* Looks up the Endorsement by an Endorsement identifier, perhaps a URI, and receives the Endorsement from the device maker, most likely over a channel that has both confidentiality, integrity protection and authentication.
* Performs the Verification of the Attestation Evidence which involves: verifying the signature on the Attestation Evidence and comparison of claims to reference values in the Endorsement.
* Generates the Attestation Results which involves making some new values that report the result of comparison to the reference values and copying implied claims from the Endorsements and copying some claims from the Attestation Evidence

This maps as follows in the RATS architecture:

Endorser:

: The device maker

Endorsement:

> : A detailed message created by the device maker that is secured for confidentiality that contains reference values, the verification key and implicit claims

Reviewer 4: we don't define the term implicit claims (yet) therefore needs some explanation here.
Also need to resolve if "Endorser" can supply "reference values" or if only "Reverence Value Provider" does that.

Reviewer 2: pls see the comment below

Attester: 

: The HW and SW made by the device maker

Attestation Evidence:

> : A protocol message generated by the Attester sent to the Relying Party

Reviewer 4: presumably the protocol message contains Evidence?

Verifier and Verifier Owner:

: A third-party Attestation service that can process Attestation Evidence from many different device makers and provide results to many different Relying Parties.

Relying Party and Relying Party Owner:

: The operator of a cloud-based payment service.

Attestation Result:

> : A detailed set of claims with 1) claims copied forward from the Attestation Evidence , 2) implied claims copied through from the Endorsement and 3) new claims created to report the result of comparison to reference values

Reviewer 4: I assume 'implied claims' are the same as 'implicit claims' and 'static claims'?

Reviewer 2: We should avoid "implied" or "implicit" entirely and find out if "vouched for" suits the text better here.
